Title: ‘Aladdin’ Review: This Is Not What You Wished For
Publication Source/Venue: The New York Times, May. 22. 2019.
URL: https://www.nytimes.com/2019/05/22/movies/aladdin-review.html?auth=login-facebook
Top 5 Words: Disney, Aladdin, exploitation, weird, stereotypes
Summary: This article gives a review on Disney’s recent Aladdin remake. The author mentions that most of the movie was done with the main focus being to gain profits from its various brands. There is nothing memorable about the movie and the racial and cultural stereotypes created various problems. 


“Aladdin,” the 1992 cartoon feature with Robin Williams as a garrulous blue genie, may not be the best movie from Disney’s second golden age of animation, but like the others it has durable charms and memorable songs. “Aladdin,” the new live-action re-whatever with a blue Will Smith popping out of the lamp, may not be the worst product of the current era of legacy intellectual property exploitation (it’s likely that the worst is yet to come), but like most of the others it invites a simple question: Why?

The answer — spoiler alert: “money” — may not surprise you. I know it’s pointless to complain about Disney’s drive to wring every last dollar from its various brands. You might as well complain about the animal sidekicks (and I will). But the movie itself, while not entirely terrible — a lot of craft has been purchased, and even a little art — is pointless in a particularly aggressive way.


The studio’s earlier cash-grab strategy was to protect the classic status of its “A” material through managed scarcity and lavish reissuing. Each new micro-generation of viewers could be initiated into fandom with a bit of ceremony: Here was an old thing that was being passed on to you in a shiny new package, a polished heirloom in the form of a special VHS or DVD edition or a limited run in theaters. What had belonged to your parents and grandparents could also be yours, whether it was “Snow White” or “The Little Mermaid.” (Not anymore with “Song of the South,” though.)


There were problems with this approach, including the preservation of tropes and images that came to seem old-fashioned, and not necessarily in a good way. The patriarchal princess stories. The cultural and racial stereotypes. That kind of thing. But Disney, long committed to doing well by meaning well, has synergized evolving social attitudes with advancing digital technology to concoct a series of updates.

None of these have surpassed the original, but that might be too much to ask. I can’t think of one — not “The Jungle Book”; not “Mary Poppins Returns”; not the recent, somber “Dumbo”; certainly not this “Aladdin” — that seems able to stand alone in the popular imagination. They are weird and grotesque hybrids, belonging to no particular era, style or creative sensibility, like dishes at a chain restaurant that fuse disparate food trends to produce flavors alien to every known earthly cuisine.

“Aladdin” is not a cartoon, but it takes place in cartoonlike spaces that trade the grace and flow of animation for the cold literalism of computer-generated imagery. The animal sidekicks — a mischievous monkey, a loyal tiger and a malignant parrot — are neither cute nor especially realistic. The human beings occupying the frame alongside them look, with the partial exception of the genie, like people dressed up as Disney characters. They run and jump and dance and sing and wear excruciatingly bright costumes, almost never memorably.