Title: Disney’s New Mulan Is a Dull Reflection of the Original
Publication Source/Venue: Vanity Fair, Sept. 3. 2020.
URL: https://www.vanityfair.com/hollywood/2020/09/review-disneys-new-mulan-is-a-dull-reflection-of-the-original
Top 5 Words: Mulan, Disney, action, remake, lifeless 
Summary: This article summarizes the recent Disney remake movie, Mulan. The author calls the movie a ‘lifeless’ remake that is missing the magic and creativity that was in the original Disney movie. 



Long ago, in the ancient year of 1998, Disney tried something tricky: an animated princess musical that was also an action movie, with big fight scenes no doubt aimed at appealing to little boys who may have balked at another Beauty and the Beast or Little Mermaid. (For such balking was encouraged in boys more back then than it is now, though it is still plenty encouraged.) In making Mulan—based on the Chinese legend of warrior woman Hua Mulan, who fights for the emperor’s army in her father’s stead, disguised as a man—also continued a half-hearted project of diversity, adding more global shape to its princess canon. It was, at the time, a big deal.

The film, directed by Barry Cook and Tony Bancroft, earned that bigness in enough places. There was the powerhouse ballad “Reflection,” sung by Lea Salonga in the film but rerecorded by Christina Aguilera, the belter’s first single and still one of her most enduring songs. And there was an eye-popping mountain battle scene, aided by ever more confident computer animation, in which an invading horde of Huns is subsumed by an avalanche. It’s stunning stuff, still now, even though much of the rest of the hand-drawn animation looks so sadly quaint from the vantage point of the digital age.

Without the songs and silliness of the 1998 original, 2020’s Mulan throws itself into comparison not with other children’s classics, but with hundreds of other sword-and-sandal films that have all pretty much done what Mulan does before. Caro, filming in New Zealand and China, finds some stunning backdrops. The costumes look great. The martial arts sequences nicely approximate the fluid, floating grace of wuxia films. But somehow Mulan’s assets don’t coalesce into a thrilling whole. It’s certainly significant that there is a big Disney film with a Chinese actor, Liu Yifei, as its star. But watching Mulan, one gets the sense that this triumph of representation was considered enough—like the job was done once casting was finished, and everything else was just mechanical detail. Mulan deserves better, as does Liu, as do eager audiences.

Would that some of that magic had been applied elsewhere. Mulan’s choppy script, from four credited writers, has no time for flights of fancy or emotional depth. Instead it hurries us through the basic beats of Mulan’s story, from humble village girl bound for arranged marriage to military hero of the empire, and, after some just-fine battle sequences, dumps us out at the end, gesturing heavily toward an impressiveness it never actually conjured. Though Liu holds her scenes well, we barely even know Mulan. She’s a mere cipher—an emblem with which a huge studio can pat itself on the back, proud to offer this lukewarm plate of inspirational content before moving on to the next whatever. Who is that girl I see, indeed.