
Title: Cinderella review – straight-faced sentimentality
Publication Source/Venue: The Guardian, Mar. 29. 2015. 4:00PM
URL: https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/mar/29/cinderella-review-straight-faced-sentimentality-kenneth-branagh
Top 5 Words: Disney, Cinderella, ravishing, fairytale, old-fashioned
Summary: This article gives a review on Disney’s recent Cinderella remake. The author comments that the movie has stayed true to the original bringing back the old-fashioned world that Cinderella was set in. This article, like the first document gives a review on Disney remake of a classic. 


There’s always been a fairytale element to Kenneth Branagh’s directing career; the question of whether or not he’ll go to the ball tends to hang over all his movies, right up until the clock strikes 12. One of Branagh’s finest fantasy flicks, Mary Shelley’s Frankenstein, was as cruelly treated as any of Charles Perrault’s fabled heroines, while the marvellously Ken Russell-esque The Magic Flute signally failed to be showered with riches or made the belle of any box-office ball. Meanwhile, the Hitchcock pastiche Dead Again went from being a copper-bottomed catastrophe to a Stateside hit after an 11th-hour sprinkling of fairy dust (in the form of reprocessed black-and-white flashbacks) turned it from pauper to princess. Most remarkably, Branagh took the straw of Marvel’s Thor comic strip and spun from it the gold of a surprisingly witty blockbuster (Transformers meets Xanadu), a remarkable feat of movie magic.

And so to Cinderella, a live-action reboot of one of Disney’s most enduring animations (the credits cite their “Cinderella properties” alongside Perrault), notable for its straight-faced sentimentality and unfashionable absence of post-Enchanted irony. While Maleficent and Into the Woods unpicked their fairytale roots, Chris Weitz’s screenplay is almost radically anti-revisionist in its refusal to rewrite familiar tropes. This is an unashamedly old-fashioned world of pumpkin coaches, glass slippers and chimes-at-midnight transformations. Why, Cinders even talks to the tiny mice who are the only friends in her coal-scuttle existence; I half expected her to burst into a chorus of A Dream Is a Wish Your Heart Makes. Resisting modern urban updates, Branagh thus returns us to the strange netherworld of European folklore and Disney Americana upon which the House of Mouse was built. If that sounds fantastically unexciting, a $132m worldwide opening proves that Branagh’s “if it ain’t broke don’t fix it” instincts were entirely on the money.

What has proved problematic are the gender politics, with stories of Downton Abbey’s Lily James employing a “liquid diet” to pour herself into Sandy Powell’s tightly corseted costumes provoking controversy about negative body images, paradoxically reducing talk of her performance to discussions of her waistline. Yet while this throwback Cinderella may not enjoy the questing action-adventure of the ass-kicking heroines of Brave or Frozen (the Frozen Fever short provides a crowd-pulling curtain-raiser), she is more independent-spirited than her critics have acknowledged. Living by her mother’s deathbed mantra “Have courage and be kind”, this lonely girl is unimpressed by wealth (she falls not for a prince but an “apprentice” whom she meets on equal ground), unimpeded by fear (she outrides the royal hunt in defence of a befriended stag), and undaunted by the spectacular cruelty of her step-family. 

