Mr. Assange, who has published hundreds of thousands of classified documents exposing the secrets of governments, banks and other powerful institutions, is a figure who inspires strong feelings, including ambivalence. The intense devotion of some of his admirers can seem like yet another digital cult of personality, while the disdain and condescension of critics often looks defensive and clueless. “The Fifth Estate” tries to have it both ways, to harness the righteous, transgressive thrill of the WikiLeaks project and also to wag a cautionary finger when it appears to go too far.
The story, flashing back from a pivotal moment in 2010 when Assange and his colleagues are preparing to publish a huge cache of diplomatic cables, traces an arc from admiration to disillusionment. It charts the relationship between Assange and Daniel Domscheit-Berg (Daniel Brühl), a German hacker who joined WikiLeaks in 2007 and later wrote one of the books that Mr. Condon and Mr. Singer drew upon. Daniel is initially impressed by Assange’s courage and idealism and dazzled by his charisma. Leapfrogging from city to city, sleeping on couches and living out of a backpack, Assange is like a cyber-anarchist Joan of Arc, a clean-shaven, silver-haired wizard in the kingdom of the scruffy.
He is suspicious of authority, committed to truth-telling and instinctively drawn to the side of the underdog. He also shows tendencies toward paranoia, monomania and rudeness. He hogs laptops and power cords, bursts in on Daniel and his girlfriend (Alicia Vikander) as they are trying to enjoy a quiet moment and brings in new recruits who threaten Daniel’s special position. He also, almost incidentally, has a transformative effect on the practice of journalism, entering into mutually beneficial if sometimes awkward alliances with publications like Der Spiegel, The Guardian and The New York Times.
When WikiLeaks exposes the shady dealings of an international bank and publishes video of the killing of civilians in Afghanistan, “The Fifth Estate” becomes a swift and rousing global thriller, with energy and velocity that recall some of the better “Bourne” movies and a flurry of fine supporting performances. (The always excellent David Thewlis deserves mention for his brooding, fidgety portrayal of the Guardian reporter Nick Davies.) But the geopolitics and the news-breaking are tangled up in too much psychodrama, and the movie loses its focus and energy as subplots and tangential themes proliferate. As we zoom from squatter apartments to newsrooms to government offices (where Laura Linney, Stanley Tucci and Anthony Mackie worry about their jobs and their diplomatic contacts), the picture grows fuzzier, and the vital questions it wants to raise about privacy, transparency and security grow muddier.
I blame the Internet. Like nearly every other movie that tries to confront that elusive, pervasive force head on, this one quickly loses track of what it is talking about. The challenge of conveying, on screen, the special intensity of online life is formidable. The clicking of keys and the dragging of mice; the pallor of faces illuminated by glowing plasma; the little bar, always growing too slowly, that shows how much data has been downloaded — these are visual clichés that seem to be the only available tools.
