Paris: a city of light, a city for lovers and the perfect setting for Jean-Pierre Jeunetﾕs wonderfully charmingﾊAm四ie. With plenty of character and heart, this classic French hit is the dictionary definition of ﾔfeel goodﾕ. Am四ie is no ordinary woman. Played by the beautifully fresh-faced Audrey Tautou, sheﾕs a young woman who discretely orchestrates the lives of the people around her, sorting out their sad little problems. But when she discovers a strange photo album belonging to Nino (Mathieu Kassovitz), she soon realises that she is in love and has problems of her own.[Some plot details ahead]ﾊAm四ie was raised apart from other children; her father, a man obsessed with garden gnomes, misdiagnosed her with a weak heart, while a suicidal person leaping off a building landed on Am四ieﾕs luckless mother, killing her flat. Am四ie observes life at a distance, that is, until the death of Princes Diana leads her to discover a hidden old rusty box, in which a young boy once hoarded his treasures. In tracking down the boy ﾐ now a grown man ﾐ she returns the box to an overjoyed owner and Am四ie, watching in secret, finds her lifeﾕs work: she will make people happy. Amusing herself (and us), she devises the most brilliant ways for bringing about their happiness.She plays matchmaker with the lonely tobacconist Georgette (Isabelle Nanty) at the local Parisian cafe, and Joseph (Dominique Pinon), a customer who has been jilted. She comes up with witty ways to get her reclusive father (Rufus) to begin his once-upon-a-time dream of travelling the world. She even stands up for Lucien (Jamel Debbouze), an Arab clerk working at the grocers whoﾕs constantly being shamed publicly by his controlling boss (Urbain Cacellier).Am四ie explores the simplicity of life, and sees the beauty in almost everything. From the very start of the movie, with her brief, particular and wonderfully distinctive likes and dislikes, you begin to grow attached to her character and progression in the film. The real delight comes later, from the army of oddballs that rotate the relationship Am四ie shares with each of the unusual characters she meets. With each character comes a different story, and although I hate to admit it, I consider myself a helpless romantic, so naturally my favourite wasﾊthe love story between Amelie and Nino, whichﾊmy heart swell. While their love story may not be the most conventional, the childlike pranks you see throughout the film make for a playfully romantic adventure.The film, filled with a great cast who embody charm instead of impersonating it, coupled with Jeunetﾕs direction, makes exquisite use of Paris as an inviting playground for Am四ieﾕs missions of kindness. One of the many reasons I love this movie is that the Montmartre Am四ie lives in is an unreal, dream version of Paris. What with the accordion music, corner cafes and sepia tones that soak through panoramic shots of the city, this supposedly modern-day Paris Jeunet tries to create for us, could most certainly be the Paris of 30 years before.