Title: AIR FORCE ONE  Review
Authors: Janet Maslin
Source/Date: New York Times, June 25th 1997  
URL: Air Force One (nytimes.com)
Keywords: Harrison Ford, plane, President, hijacking, Glenn Close, First Lady 

A.F.O." monograms on presidential hand towels show how much the little things count in Wolfgang Petersen's fast-paced, red-blooded action movie "Air Force One." Small niceties aboard the presidential plane set the tone for a larger amenity: the brave, tough, decent commander in chief.
As played in warmly electable fashion by Harrison Ford, President James Marshall is pure paragon, a statesman of strong backbone who kisses his wife even when no one's looking. When Ford waves to admirers while boarding the president's airplane, he has no trouble looking every inch the star. But the inspiration stops just beyond the man himself, who amounts to the summer's most enjoyable special effect, and beyond voyeurism about how he travels.
"Air Force One" otherwise offers what has begun to seem routine excitement: crazed terrorists, midair dogfights, desperate struggles staged beside an airplane's open door. And dialogue bristling with manful military authority: "Let's not waste any more time. Send the Nimitz back in."
Honestly, who ever meant to feel this jaded? But this season's blockbusters have unfolded at such fever pitch that a presidential hijacking in one more airplane thriller has an aspect of deja vu. Petersen, known for the efficient and vigorously muscular action of "Das Boot" and "In the Line of Fire," once again directs with galvanizing intensity, but the relentlessness of these thrills carries little in the way of surprise. The season's hottest, looniest, most gripping adventure remains "Face/Off" from the more luridly audacious John Woo.
Despite the seals and monograms that make it so specially Presidential, the blunt, high-octane "Air Force One" recalls "Executive Decision," "Con Air" and all the other scary airborne thrillers that no real plane will ever dare show in flight. In an added flourish to make Tom Clancy blush, it has a plot concerning the dread return of Communism to the Russian empire. Andrew W. Marlowe's screenplay begins with a commando raid in Kazakhstan that captures a scheming, dangerous general (played nearly wordlessly by Jurgen Prochnow of "Das Boot"). To free their leader, a group of radical Russians masquerades as a news crew to board and then take over Air Force One.
The film's mustache twirler of a villain is played with scary glee by Gary Oldman, who rhapsodizes about Mother Russia while trying to guess where President Marshall is hiding. Cleverly concealed aboard Air Force One during much of the movie, the president even finds ways to contact White House personnel on the ground.
Turns out the president of the United States can have as much trouble with telephone operators or cell phone batteries as anybody else.
Meanwhile, lest "Air Force One" be confused with anything ordinary, Petersen stages some furiously energetic airborne sequences starring the painted 747 that plays the title role. Thanks to the official cooperation of the United States military, this Hollywood valentine to dashing Presidential style also features real F-15's, Blackhawk helicopters, C-130 cargo planes and other huge pieces of hardware, which were maintained by a large corps of military personnel (numbering about 250) on the Sony payroll.